.TH SLASH 1 "2026-05-16" "slash 1.2.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
slash \- a Unix shell with structured commands, composable pipelines, and first-class jobs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B slash
.RI [ options ]
.RB [ \-c
.IR command ]
.RI [ script
.RI [ argument
.RI ...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B slash
is a Unix shell built around a three-stage execution model:
.B Shape
(parsed structure),
.B Program
(lowered executable semantics, immutable), and
.B Job
(runtime instance with process group, pids, state, result).
The same grammar drives parsing, syntax highlighting, completion, and editor behavior \(em there is no second tokenizer or regex layer.

.B slash
chooses correctness over POSIX compatibility in the places shells have historically lied:
.IP \(bu 2
.B pipefail
is on by default with no surface syntax to disable it.
.IP \(bu 2
Variables are scalars or lists; there is no implicit word-splitting after expansion.
.IP \(bu 2
.B argv
is never flattened to a shell string; expansion happens exactly once per word.
.IP \(bu 2
.B Job
state transitions monotonically:
.B pending \(-> running \(-> {stopped \(<-> running}* \(-> done.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-c \fIcommand\fP
Execute
.I command
as a one-shot, then exit. Positional arguments after
.I command
are bound to
.B $0..$N.
.TP
.B \-\-norc
Skip sourcing
.B ~/.slashrc
on interactive startup. Useful for tests and reproducible debug sessions.
.TP
.B \-v\fP, \fB\-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-sexp \fIfile\fP
Parse the file and dump the raw parser S-expression. Layer-1 introspection (see
.B PLAN
\(sc17).
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-shape \fIfile\fP
Parse and dump the typed
.B Shape
tree. Layer-2 introspection.
.TP
.B \-\-dump\-program \fIfile\fP
Parse, lower, and dump the
.B Program
tree. Layer-3 introspection.

.SH INTERACTIVE FEATURES
On an interactive TTY,
.B slash
provides:
.IP \(bu 2
Syntax highlighting as you type (driven by the same grammar that parses the line).
.IP \(bu 2
History autosuggestions (dim ghost text suffix; Right Arrow / Ctrl-F accepts).
.IP \(bu 2
Intelligent Tab completion with per-command specs (PATH commands,
.B cmd
defs,
.B str
names, git subcommands, ssh hosts, signal names, job specs, file paths).
.IP \(bu 2
Smart prefix-aware Up/Down history navigation.
.IP \(bu 2
Reverse-incremental history search via Ctrl-R.
.IP \(bu 2
Rich prompt presets via
.B $SLASH_PROMPT
(\fBdefault\fP, \fBrich\fP, \fBminimal\fP) or full zsh-style format via
.B $PROMPT
\(em supports
.BR %F{#hex} ,
.BR %K{#hex} ,
.BR %D{strftime} ,
.BR %n@%m ,
.BR %~ ,
and friends.
.IP \(bu 2
Pre-prompt status notices (\fBslash: exit N (SIGNAME)\fP) and live job-state announcements (\fB[N] Stopped\fP, \fB[N] Continued\fP, \fB[N] Done\fP).
.IP \(bu 2
User-configurable key bindings via the
.B key
builtin (see below).

.SH BUILTINS
.B slash
ships with the standard POSIX builtins plus structured additions. See each builtin's help (e.g.
.B key --help
) for full options.
.PP
.B Process control:
.B jobs ,
.B wait ,
.B fg ,
.B bg ,
.B kill ,
.B disown ,
.B trap ,
.B exec .
.PP
.B Variables and environment:
.B export ,
.B unset ,
.B read ,
.B shift .
.PP
.B Navigation and I/O:
.B cd ,
.B pwd ,
.B echo ,
.B printf ,
.B true ,
.B false ,
.B test
(also
.BR [ ).
.PP
.B Flow control:
.B break ,
.B continue ,
.B return ,
.B exit ,
.B source
(also
.BR . ).
.PP
.B Introspection:
.B type ,
.B history ,
.B command .
.PP
.B Editor-time:
.B str
(literal-text abbreviations),
.B key
(user-configurable key bindings),
.B cmd
(list/query/erase user-defined commands; the
.B cmd NAME { body }
keyword form defines).
.PP
.B Behavioral wrappers:
.B time
(reports wall + user + sys CPU for a wrapped pipeline or block).

.SH COMMAND NOT FOUND
When the shell can't resolve a command name (no builtin, no
.B cmd
definition, no executable on
.B $PATH ),
slash emits
.B "slash: command not found: NAME"
to stderr and the command's exit status is
.B 127 .
The pre-prompt
.B slash: exit N
notice is suppressed for this case so the user sees one specific
message instead of two redundant lines.
.PP
A user-defined
.B cmd command_not_found
intercepts this path. When defined, it is invoked with
.BR $0 = command_not_found ,
.BR $1 = "the original command name,"
.BR $2..$N = "the original arguments."
The handler's exit status becomes the failed command's exit
status, so a handler that successfully recovers can
.B return 0
to make the original invocation appear to have succeeded. Re-entry
is guarded \(em a missing command from inside the handler does NOT
re-invoke the handler; the standard message surfaces instead.
.PP
Example:
.RS
.PP
.B cmd command_not_found {
.PP
.B "  echo \(dqno such command: $1; did you mean ${1}_v2?\(dq"
.PP
.B "  return 127"
.PP
.B }
.RE

.SH KEY BINDINGS
The
.B key
builtin configures user keystroke shortcuts. Two forms:

.B key KEYSPEC \fIaction-name\fP
\(em bind to a named editor action.
Examples:
.RS
.PP
.B key Esc-P history-prev-prefix
.PP
.B key Ctrl-X edit-in-editor
.RE
.PP

.B key KEYSPEC "\fIliteral text\fP"
\(em type bytes into the buffer; trailing
.B \\n
accepts.
Examples:
.RS
.PP
.B key Esc-L "ls -la\\n"
.PP
.B key Esc-G "git status\\n"
.RE
.PP
KEYSPEC grammar:
.IP \(bu 2
Modifiers joined with hyphens:
.BR Ctrl-X ,
.BR Esc-Left ,
.BR Ctrl-Esc-Right ,
.BR Shift-F7 .
.IP \(bu 2
.BR Esc- ,
.BR Meta- ,
.BR Alt- ,
.BR Option- ,
and
.BR Opt-
are five synonyms for the meta modifier (terminals emit identical
.B \\e
byte prefixes for all of them). Slash prints the canonical form as
.B Esc-
in listings \(em wire-honest and accurate on every platform (Macs
don't have an Alt key).
.IP \(bu 2
Function keys
.BR F1 .. F12 .
.IP \(bu 2
Named keys:
.BR Up ,
.BR Down ,
.BR Left ,
.BR Right ,
.BR Home ,
.BR End ,
.BR PageUp ,
.BR PageDown ,
.BR Tab ,
.BR Enter ,
.BR Backspace ,
.BR Delete ,
.BR Escape ,
.BR Space ,
.BR Insert .
.IP \(bu 2
UTF-8 keyspecs: bind directly to a Unicode codepoint your terminal
emits, e.g.
.B key "π" some-action
(on Macs in default compose mode, Option+P emits the
.B π
codepoint \(em this lets you bind to one-keystroke chords your
terminal happens to send, even when slash has no symbolic name for
the chord).
.PP
.B macOS:
to fire
.B Esc-X
chords with one keystroke (Option+X), enable
.B "Use Option as Meta key"
in your terminal preferences. Terminal.app calls it
.B "Use Option as Meta key" ;
iTerm2 calls it
.B "Esc+"
on the Option key. With the toggle off (the default), Option+letter
emits a Unicode compose character (e.g. Option+L \(rA
.B ¬ )
which slash receives as a literal codepoint, not a meta chord. The
.B Esc-X
form (press Escape, then X within the meta-timeout) works
identically with or without the toggle.
.PP
Management:
.IP \(bu 2
.B key
(or
.B key -l
/
.B --list )
\(em list all installed bindings in canonical form.
.IP \(bu 2
.B key --actions
\(em list every registered editor action.
.IP \(bu 2
.B key -e KEYSPEC
(or
.B --erase )
\(em remove a binding.
.IP \(bu 2
.B key -r
(or
.B --reset )
\(em clear all user bindings.
.IP \(bu 2
.B key --probe
\(em interactive diagnostic: press any key, slash names it and shows the raw bytes.
.PP
.B key ,
.B str ,
and
.B cmd
share one fixed flag set:
.B -l
/
.B --list ,
.B -e
/
.B --erase ,
.B -r
/
.B --reset .
There are no other spellings.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B $SLASH_PROMPT
Selects a built-in prompt preset:
.B default
(cwd $),
.B rich
(venv, user@host, cwd, git branch, jobs, sigil), or
.B minimal
(just the sigil). When unset, defaults to
.B default.
Overridden by
.B $PROMPT
if both are set.
.TP
.B $PROMPT
Full zsh-style prompt format string. Takes precedence over
.B $SLASH_PROMPT.
Supports
.B %F{#hex} ,
.B %K{#hex} ,
.B %D{strftime} ,
.B %n
(username),
.B %m
(short hostname),
.B %~
(cwd, home-tilde),
.B %?
(last exit status), and other zsh codes.
.TP
.B $SLASH_NOTIFY
.B immediate
enables bash
.B set -b
semantics: backgrounded jobs print
.B [N] Done <cmd>
above the in-progress prompt buffer the moment they finish. Default (unset or any other value): notices print at the next prompt boundary (bash
.B set +b
).
.TP
.B $EDITOR \fP/\fB $VISUAL
Editor invoked by Ctrl-X in the line editor for multi-line composition.
.TP
.B $HOME \fP/\fB $XDG_DATA_HOME
Used to locate
.B ~/.slashrc
and the persistent history index. The history file lives at
.B $XDG_DATA_HOME/slash/history.jsonl
(falling back to
.BR $HOME/.local/share/slash/history.jsonl ).

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.slashrc
Sourced on interactive startup. See
.B .slashrc.example
in the project root for a documented template.
.TP
.B $XDG_DATA_HOME/slash/history.jsonl
Persistent metadata-rich command history (cwd, timestamp, exit status, duration). JSONL format; each line a JSON object.

.SH EXIT STATUS
The exit status of a command is the exit status of its last (or wrapped) component. For pipelines,
.B pipefail
is always on: a non-zero status from any stage propagates as the pipeline's status.
.B 0
means success;
.B 1..125
are command-defined;
.B 126
means "command found but not executable";
.B 127
means "command not found";
.B 128+N
indicates termination by signal
.IR N .

.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Interactive — bind Option-L to list current directory
.PP
On any macOS, regardless of terminal preferences:
.PP
.RS
.B echo 'key Option-L "ls -la\\n"' >> ~/.slashrc
.RE
.PP
Then press Option+L in any interactive
.B slash
session.

.SS One-liner — time a pipeline
.PP
.RS
.B slash -c 'time grep -c slash *.md | sort -n'
.RE
.PP
Wall + user + sys time appears on stderr after the pipeline completes.

.SS Script — process substitution
.PP
.RS
.B slash -c 'diff <(sort a.txt) <(sort b.txt)'
.RE

.SH AUTHORS
slash is developed at https://github.com/shreeve/slash.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bash (1),
.BR zsh (1),
.BR fish (1).
.PP
Project documentation:
.B https://shreeve.github.io/slash/
.br
Source:
.B https://github.com/shreeve/slash
